3d basics (#132)
johko/computer-vision-course: chapters/en/Unit 8 - 3D Vision, Scene Rendering and Reconstruction/Terminologies and Basics/LinearAlgebra.mdx

position in space, often represented by their three Cartesian coordinates $$[x,y,z]$$.

![Axis handedness](https://www.dropbox.com/scl/fi/8x3poz1kba2zpa7nidzfb/axes_handedness.png?rlkey=d21xjqnvs5ivfrai2vc4nqrbg&raw=1)

However, different systems have different conventions for these coordinate system. The most important difference is handedness, which is the relative orientation
of the X, Y and Z axes. The easiest way to remember the difference is to point your middle finger inwards, such that your thumb, index and middle fingers are roughly at right-angles to each other. On your left hand, your thumb (X), index finger (Y) and middle finger (Z) form a left-handed coordinate system. Similarly, the fingers of your right hand make a right-handed coordinate system.

In mathematics and physics, a right-handed system is usually used. However, in computer graphics, different libraries and environments have different conventions.
Notably, Blender, Pytorch3d and OpenGL (mostly) use right-handed coordinates, whilst DirectX uses left-handed coordinates.

Here we will use the right-handed convention, following Blender and NerfStudio.

## Transformations

> It is useful to be able to rotate, scale, and translate these coordinates in space. For example, if an object is moving, or if we want to change these coordinates from world coordinates, relative to some fixed set of axes, to coordinates relative to our camera.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is useful to be able to rotate, scale, and translate these coordinates in space. For example, if an object is moving, or if we want to change these coordinates from world coordinates relative to some fixed set of axes, to coordinates relative to our camera.
```

These transformations can be represented by matrices. 
To allow us to represent translation, rotation and scaling in a consistent manner, we take the three dimensional coordinates $$[x,y,z]$$, and add an extra coordinate $$w=1$$.

> These are known as homogeneous coordinates - more generally, w can take any value, and all points on the four dimensional line $$[wx, wy, wz, w]$$ correspond to the same point $$[x,y,z]$$ in three-dimensional space. However here w will always be 1.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
These are known as homogeneous coordinates - more generally, `w` can take any value, and all points on the four-dimensional line $$[wx, wy, wz, w]$$ correspond to the same point $$[x,y,z]$$ in three-dimensional space. However, here, `w` will always be 1.
```

Reviewer 2: Added a bit of formatting, so it reads a bit easier.

Author: Added TeX tags instead of code tags - hope that's consistent with style. If not, need to change to code throughout.

Libraries such as [Pytorch3d](https://pytorch3d.org/) provide a range of functions for generating and manipulating transformations.

> Yet another convention to note - OpenGL treats positions as column vectors x (of shape 4x1), and applies a transformation M by pre-multiplying the  vector by the matrix ( M @ x),

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Yet another convention to note - OpenGL treats positions as column vectors `x` (of shape 4x1), and applies a transformation `M` by pre-multiplying the vector by the matrix (`M @ x`),
```

> whereas DirectX and Pytorch3d consider positions as row vectors of shape (1x4), and applies a transformation by post-multiplying the vector by the matrix ( x @ M ). To convert between the two conventions we need to take the transpose of the matrix M.T .

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
whereas DirectX and Pytorch3d consider positions as row vectors of shape (1x4), and apply a transformation by post-multiplying the vector by the matrix ( `x @ M` ). To convert between the two conventions, we need to take the transpose of the matrix `M.T` .
```

Author: Fixed

  \cos\beta & 0 & \sin\beta & 0 \\
  0 & 1 & 0 & 0 \\
  -\sin\beta & 0 & \cos\beta & 0 \\
  0 & 0 & 0 & 1
  \end{pmatrix}
  $$

- Rotation around the Z-axis

  $$
  R_z(\gamma) = \begin{pmatrix}
  \cos\gamma & -\sin\gamma & 0 & 0 \\
  \sin\gamma & \cos\gamma & 0 & 0 \\
  0 & 0 & 1 & 0 \\
  0 & 0 & 0 & 1
  \end{pmatrix}
  $$

Note that the standard convention is that a positive rotation angle corresponds to an anti-clockwise rotation when the axis of rotation is pointing towards the viewer.
Also note that in most libraries the cosine function requires the angle to be in radians. To convert from
degrees to radians, multiply by $$\pi/180$$.

### Scaling

Another key transformation is to be able to scale an object, increasing or decreasing its size. It is possible to write down a matrix corresponding to scaling along all three axes at the same time

$$
S = \begin{pmatrix}
s_x & 0 & 0 & 0 \\
0 & s_y & 0 & 0 \\
0 & 0 & s_z & 0 \\
0 & 0 & 0 & 1
\end{pmatrix}
$$

where $$s_x$$, $$s_y$$, and $$s_z$$ are the scaling factors along the X, Y, and Z axes, respectively. Note that $$s=1$$ corresponds to no change in size along that axis.

### Combining transformations

> Multiple transformations can be combined by multiplying together their matrices. Here we'll use @ to denote matrix multiplication.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Multiple transformations can be combined by multiplying together their matrices. Here we'll use `@` to denote matrix multiplication.
```

Author: Fixed. But moved earlier from @ricard-inho 's suggestion

$$
S = \begin{pmatrix}
s_x & 0 & 0 & 0 \\
0 & s_y & 0 & 0 \\
0 & 0 & s_z & 0 \\
0 & 0 & 0 & 1
\end{pmatrix}
$$

where $s_x$, $s_y$, and $s_z$ are the scaling factors along the X, Y, and Z axes, respectively.

Let us try the following example of a scaling our cube by a factor of $2$ along the X-axis and $0.5$ along the Y-axis.

```python
# set up figure
fig = plt.figure()
ax = fig.add_subplot(111, projection='3d')

# plot original cube
plot_cube(ax, cube,label="Original", color="blue")

# scaling matrix (scale by 2 along x-axis and by 0.5 along y-axis)
scaling_matrix = np.array([[2, 0, 0, 0],
                        [0, 0.5, 0, 0],
                        [0, 0, 1, 0],
                        [0, 0, 0, 1]])

scaled_cube = scaling_matrix @ cube

plot_cube(ax, scaled_cube, label="Scaled", color="green")
```

The output should look something like this:

![output_scaling](https://huggingface.co/datasets/hf-vision/course-assets/blob/main/scaling.png)

### Rotations

Rotations around an axis are another commonly used transformation. There are a number of different ways of representing rotations, including Euler angles and quaternions, which can be very useful in some applications. 

> Again, libraries such as Pytorch3d include a wide range of different 

Reviewer: the sentence died here

Reviewer 3: fixed

- Rotation around the X-axis

  $$
  R_x(\alpha) = \begin{pmatrix}
  1 & 0 & 0 & 0 \\
  0 & \cos\alpha & -\sin\alpha & 0 \\
  0 & \sin\alpha & \cos\alpha & 0 \\
  0 & 0 & 0 & 1
  \end{pmatrix}
  $$

A little example for a positive 20 degree roation around the X-axis is given below:

```python
# set up figure
fig = plt.figure()
ax = fig.add_subplot(111, projection='3d')

# plot original cube
plot_cube(ax, cube,label="Original", color="blue")

# rotation matrix: +20 deg around x-axis
angle = 20 * np.pi / 180
rotation_matrix = np.array([[1, 0, 0, 0],
                        [0, np.cos(angle), -np.sin(angle), 0],
                        [0, np.sin(angle), np.cos(angle), 0],
                        [0, 0, 0, 1]])

rotated_cube = rotation_matrix @ cube

plot_cube(ax, rotated_cube, label="Rotated", color="orange")
```

The output should look something like this:

![output_rotation](https://huggingface.co/datasets/hf-vision/course-assets/blob/main/rotation.png)

- Rotation around the Y-axis

  $$
  R_y(\beta) = \begin{pmatrix}
  \cos\beta & 0 & \sin\beta & 0 \\
  0 & 1 & 0 & 0 \\
  -\sin\beta & 0 & \cos\beta & 0 \\
  0 & 0 & 0 & 1
  \end{pmatrix}
  $$

> I am sure you can use the example snippet above and figure out how to implement a rotation around the Y-axis.😎😎

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We are sure you can use the example snippet above and figure out how to implement a rotation around the Y-axis.😎😎
```

- Rotation around the Z-axis

  $$
  R_z(\gamma) = \begin{pmatrix}
  \cos\gamma & -\sin\gamma & 0 & 0 \\
  \sin\gamma & \cos\gamma & 0 & 0 \\
  0 & 0 & 1 & 0 \\
  0 & 0 & 0 & 1
  \end{pmatrix}
  $$

Again, can you use the last code snippet and implement a rotation around the Z-axis❓

Note that the standard convention is that a positive rotation angle corresponds to an anti-clockwise rotation when the axis of rotation is pointing toward the viewer.
Also note that in most libraries the cosine function requires the angle to be in radians. To convert from
degrees to radians, multiply by $\pi/180$.

### Combining transformations

Multiple transformations can be combined by multiplying together their matrices. 
Note that the order that matricies are multiplied matters - with the the matrices being applied right to left. To make a matrix that applies the transforms P, Q, and R, in that order, the composite transformation is given by $C = R @ Q @ P $.

> If we would want to do first the translation, then the rotation and then the scaling that we did above in one operation, it looks as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If we want to do first the translation, then the rotation, and then the scaling that we did above in one operation, it looks as follows:
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> # Basics of linear algebra for 3D data

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Basics of Linear Algebra for 3D Data
```
